---
title: "Introduction to Kubernetes ☸"
draft: false
tags: ["kubernetes", "introduction"]
weight: 1
author: "jay bhogayata"
date: "2023-12-26"
---


- kubernetes is
  - portable
  - extensible
  - open source
  platform for managing containers.
- provide declarative infrastructure and automation.
- kubernetes has very large ecosystems.
- kubernetes means pilot or helmsman in greek.

## Traditional deployment
- application is hosted on physical server.
- application is tightly coupled with server.
- resource allocation issue. one app take more memory.no way to define resource boundaries.

## Virtualization era 
  - run multiple VMs on a single physical machine.
  - allow some isolation between VMs. so some security.
  - better resource utilization.
  - each vm is full copy of OS. so it is heavy.

## Containerization era
  - similar to VMs but more lightweight more relaxed isolation.
  - lightweight, portable, self-sufficient.
  - it's own filesystem, cpu, memory, process space.
  - portable across machines.

### benefits of containerization
  - agile application creation and deployment.
  - ci and cd. integration and delivery and deployment.
  - dev and ops separation of concerns.
  - observability.
  - environment consistency across dev, test, and production.
  - portability across infrastructure providers.
  - microservices made easy.(lose coupling , distributed , elastic, scalable, resilient)

## why we need kubernetes 

- if we have 1000s of containers, how to manage them?
- if we have 100s of nodes, how to manage them?
- if one container dies, how to bring it up?

- kubernetes provide solution to run distributed systems resiliently.
### kubernetes features
  - service discovery and load balancing.
  - storage orchestration.
  - automated rollouts and rollbacks.
  - automatic bin packing.
  - self-healing.
  - secret and configuration management.
  - horizontal scaling.
  - batch execution.

- kubernetes is not pass(platform as a service). but it provide some features of pass. eg. load balancing, scaling, self-healing etc.
- Kubernetes provides the building blocks for building developer platforms, but preserves user choice and flexibility where it is important.


## kubernetes architecture

- kubernetes is a distributed system.
- it consists of master node and worker node.
- cluster is a set of nodes.

### 
- worker machine = nodes
- at least one worker node is required.
- worker node run pods.


###
- control plane = master node
- manage worker nodes.
- make global decisions about cluster.

- in production, we have multiple master nodes and multiple worker nodes.
- multiple master nodes for high availability and fault tolerance.
### control plane components
  - kube-apiserver 
    - front end for kubernetes control plane.
    - expose kubernetes api.
    - cli like kubectl talk to kube-apiserver.
    - it scales horizontally.
  - etcd
    - key value store.
    - highly available.
    - store all cluster data.
    - make sure to backup etcd.
  - kube-scheduler  
    - schedule pods on nodes.
  - kube-controller-manager
    - run controllers.
    - node controller, replication controller, endpoints controller, service account controller.
    - brain behind orchestration.
  - cloud-controller-manager
    - communicate with underlying cloud providers.
    - embed cloud specific control logic.
    - controller have cloud provider dependencies.
      - Node controller
      - Route controller
      - Service controller

### node components

- run on every node of cluster.
- kubelet:
  - agent that runs on each node.
  - make sure containers are running in a pod.
  - communicate with kube-apiserver about status of node and pod.
- kube-proxy:
  - network proxy.
  - maintain network rules on nodes.
  - allow network communication to pods from outside world.
  - implement part of kubernetes service concept.
- container runtime:
  - software to run containers.
  - containerd, cri-o and any CRI compatible runtime.

### add-ons

- dns
  - cluster dns server.
- dashboard
  - web ui for kubernetes cluster.
- container resource monitoring
  - monitoring containers.
- cluster-level logging
- network plugin
  - implement cni(container network interface) to provide networking between pods across nodes.
